---
title: EX01 - Input and Variables
author:
- Kris Jordan
- Aneka Happer
page: exercises
template: overview
site-branch: public
---

In this exercise you will use the concepts learned in the Lessons from Day 2 (data types, variables, and expressions) to produce three little programs.

Assignment Outline

* Hype Machine (Level: Novice) 
* Numeric Operators (Level: Advanced)
* Relational Operators (Level: Intermediate)

## 0. Set up the enivornment

Here's some code to start you off! First, we'll make a folder inside the `exersises` folder we made for `ex00` called `ex01`. Inside `ex01` make three files named `hype_machine.py`, `numeric_operators.py`, and `relational_operators.py`.


## 1. hype_machine.py 

Let's write a program that will boost your spirits, gas you up, and get you hype for the road ahead.

Open up the file in your ex01 directory titled `hype_machine.py`

A capability you will review in this exercise is the ability to ask for `input` from the person using your program. Try adding the following lines of code:

~~~ {.python }
    """A mad-libs style hype machine."""

    name: str = input("What is your name? ")
    print("You entered: ")
    print(name)
~~~

Save the program and try running it with this command `python -m exercises.ex01.hype_machine`. You should be prompted to enter your name and then see the rest of the program continue as soon as you enter your name and press Enter.

The functional requirements of this program are to print three lines and use _concatenation_ to build up strings and print them out given the name entered.

One line should start with the name, such as "Kaki is awesome!" if the name entered was the string "Kaki".

Another line should end with the name (optionally followed by exclamation points or periods), such as, "Keep slaying Marlee!", if the name entered was the string "Marlee".

A final line should contain the name entered in the middle, such as "You know what Ezri... you can do it!", if the name entered was the string "Ezri".

These three lines can be printed in any order.

So here's an example run of a completed program:

~~~
    $ python -m exercises.ex01.hype_machine
    What is your name? Marc
    Yes, that's right, Marc, you are a boss.
    Marc did you know you are going to crush it?
    Go forth and have a wonderful day Marc!
~~~


## 2. numeric_operators.py 

The second program in today's exercises involves practicing the numeric operators, type conversions, and string concatenation.

Open up the file in your ex01 directory titled `numeric_operators.py`.

Your goal in this program is to allow the user to input two number variables and then to print out messages with a specific format to demonstrate how the four interesting numerical operators work in Python.

Here is an example of what your program should accomplish:

~~~
    $ python -m exercises.ex01.numeric_operators
    Left-hand side: 7
    Right-hand side: 5
    7 ** 5 is 16807
    7 / 5 is 1.4
    7 // 5 is 1
    7 % 5 is 2
~~~

Here's another example run of the program:

~~~
    $ python -m exercises.ex01.numeric_operators
    Left-hand side: 8
    Right-hand side: 5
    8 ** 5 is 32768
    8 / 5 is 1.6
    8 // 5 is 1
    8 % 5 is 3
~~~

You can run your program to test it as you with the following command: `python -m exercises.ex01.numeric_operators`
The first two lines are the result of using the `input` function as in the previous example to ask for the left- and right- hand side of expressions you'll then compute. You'll want to store _both_ of those values in _separate_ variables.

The `input` function returns a `str` value of what the person using the program entered. To use it as a part of the computations which follow, you will need to make use of type conversion expressions so that they are converted to `int` values.

The next four lines are printed strings. You will need to build these strings up using concatenation. Correctly building these strings up using concatenation and type conversions as appropriate will initially be trickier than you expect. Try and get just the first line of output, the exponentiation line, working before you continue on.

Hint: Try creating additional variables to store the input numbers converted to `int`s.


## 3. relational_operators.py  

Open up the file in your ex01 directory titled `relational_operators.py`

Your goal in this program is to allow the user to input two number variables and then to print out messages with a specific format to demonstrate how four relational operators work in Python.

Here is an example of what your program should accomplish:

~~~
    $ python -m exercises.ex01.relational_operators
    Left-hand side: 7
    Right-hand side: 5
    7 < 5 is False
    7 >= 5 is True
    7 == 5 is False
    7 != 5 is True
~~~

Here's another example run of the program:

~~~
    $ python -m exercises.ex01.relational_operators
    Left-hand side: 5
    Right-hand side: 5
    5 < 5 is False
    5 >= 5 is True
    5 == 5 is True
    5 != 5 is False
~~~

You can run your program to test it as you with the following command: `python -m exercises.ex01.relational_operators`

